Programming has many applications (software development, recreation, data analysis, ...) and each of these disciplines have many aspects (technical, social, theoretical, social, ...).  One aspect that crosscuts most homes (at least for now) is text-based instructions for the computer.  It may be the case in the near future that writing this text becomes relevant (LLMs, graphical programming, better HCI, WYSIWYG ...) but for now text is still a primary means of programming computers, and reading/modifying/writing text-based programs will remain relevant for the foreseeable future as new technologies gradually mature and legacy systems remain in place.

We propose using the text-based nature of computer programming as an "entry point" for computing education. We are not the first to consider the rhetorics of code and programming (citations), but as far as we are aware we are the first to propose this as a the starting point for introductory curriculum design. By first characterizing programming as a form of collaborative writing with 3 audiences (other devs, end users, a computer) before discussing anything technical or theoretical you can quickly introduce the "big picture" of programming to learners with a variety of end goals (professional development, CS research, interaction design, project management, ...) providing a shared base of understanding and setting the stage for further growth down any other path.

This idea first took shape in 2018 when we included a lesson plan on the rhetorical situation of software which was well-recieved. We then in 2019 informally published the first diagrams used in class. From 2019 to 2022 we used the rhetorical situation of software development as a guiding design principle behind an open source curriculum and learning environment that is still used for a 10-month web development bootcamp.  While not originally inspired by CER, we found that a rhetorics-first approach is complementary to many new trends in CER (embedding ethics, program reading/comprehension, notional machines + tracing, code style, domain concerns, ) and provides a pragmatic heuristic for tricky questions in instructional design including sequencing of learning objectives, deciding what material to remove, and planning scaffolding for project-based learning (4CID).

To boot, it supports a "transdiscipilinary" integration of ethics [citation] with programming education. As lines of text-based code may fade away and computer programming becomes more broadly accessible through other means of developing software, the need to develop broad skills in interpreting the societal and environmental impacts of software will only grow. We believe R-F is future-proof, especially when considering the growing need to train "conversational programmers" and a digitally literate population who do not necessarily need to understand implementation details, master "computational thinking", or even interact directly with a development team. A basic understanding of how software comes to be through a series of collaborative discussions, compromises and decisions is a solid starting point.
We believe that Rhetorics-First programming.

We believe r-f programming education has a lot of potential connections and future directions in CER worth exploring, including: PRISMM, ...
