=== unanswered round 1

--- affordances as relational property

Q1. it is a 5th thread.  and it crosscuts them all, as they all do each other in some form or another

Pondering A. yup!  well said, that's what I'm after 

--- ux without saying ux 

Q2. 'the encoutner' is good.  but I no longer think we need to fix a term right now.  we can use different ones at different moments to capture different facets of this same thing 

Pondering B. I do like how encounter is neutral to sides!  UX focuses on the user, encounter embraces the bi-paritsanality

--- Friston's duet for one =

Q3. I'm ok with your direction, but we can't use terms like "free energy" in the course.  we can side/foot not it and Friston's paper, but it's not layer-1 compatible.  "alignment of generative models" is more appropriate.  I like how it unifies V/M, how it encompases generative AI, and especially how it does all of this under a well-established framing that existed before generative AI.
    - look into predictive processing and related models from cognitive science, this is how we work!

Pondering  C. cool framing.  keeping the inference accurate _and_ grounded.  because one of the main skills to learn with LLMs is to manage, detect, contain, restrain, etc. their hallucinations and derivations from the agreed path.  the twinning framing is powerful to explain this:  the AI generates, it doesn't twin.  we need to twin it and what it's twining to detect divergences and correct them. 
    ! and to relish the divergence when it's productive!  like we are right now.  but even what we're doing now requires strong twinning and perspective stacking of the whole course and disparate concepts in order to both ride the digressions and weave them back in.

Q4. well said! 

--- the ch1<> ch4 self-twinning symmetry 

Q5. yes, we name it explicitly.

Pondering D.  sure thing!

--- the 3-layer GEB
 
 Q6 & Pondering E.  we can arrange so the dialogues (or stories, or comics, or whatever medium matches the message) are necessary for the layer 2 reading, but can be skipped to simply learn coding (layer 1).  we can maybe have something similar for the philosophy where foot/side notes deepen the philosophy of the course but are fully optional.  we can add this as an explicit reading note.  this is platform-agnostic and can be expressed in pure MD, which is inline with the quining & accessibly open source philosophy of study lenses.  
    let's actually design all of this course so it doesn't require a special platform, just study lenses (until this constraint is too constraining, then we reassess)


--- the custom platform 

Q7.  not in scope for now.  see above 

Pondering F.  sure, why not

=== a pondering 

let's reign back and try keeping all this intellectual grandness without losing the groundedness and pedagogy, I don't want to become another untethered intellectual riff for other intellectuals.  so let's try keeping the layes and all the threads, but make each one approachable and experience-based with lists of learning objectives (though the objectives can be more open-ended and pondery as the levels go up). for example
- layer 0: learn to master a programming langauge (JEJ) through NM prediction
    primary objective: predictive mastery of the vent-based JEJ nm 
    purpose:  fluency with a particular NM & embodied form of data processing and programming 
    meta objective:  have the mastery and automations wrt to a computational medium/materiality to discuss computational thinking in context
    learned through:  embody + predictive lenses
    data thread:  how the NM ingests, represents, processes, and outputs data 
- layer 1 applied programming. using your JEJ mastery to learn how to write the right program suitabley for three audiences, preparing you to be an AI-collaborative dev who keeps their skills current with snippetry
    primary objective: context-aware comprehension, discussion and production of computational artifacts 
    purpose:  rhetorical comfort with a notional machine / computational medium 
    meta objective:  applied understanding of V and F hats in isolation
    learned through:  embody + static and analytical lenses, reflection questions, program comparison, case studies, process guides, etc
    data thread: how data/information flows through more complex and multi-modal systems (not yet "computational" systems, that's a later lens on the world.  for now rhetorics is a stepping stone to there)
- layer 2 is the methodological level.  besides things like dialogues, we can have practical exercises or thought experiments to engage in processes like design thinking, computational thinking, V/F hat swapping, and ultimately the unified Bakhtiarian loop of V/F-leaning affordances.  
    primary objective: switch comfortably between V and F hats, comfort with design & computational thinking methodologies (will need to define CT, I have previous art for this)
    purpose: comfort addressing open-ended problems with computational solutions 
    meta objective:  begin to understand the V and F hats are two sides of one coin, be ready to start merging them 
    learned through: process guides, case studies, open-ended exercises, discussion questions, external resources
    data thread: a level of comprehension of and mastery over how data flows through systems to allow for intentional design towards specific ends.
- layer 3 is fluent mastery of JS as a tool for thought and exploration: snippetry!
    primary objective: a level of programming automaticity and fluency that allows flow, exploring other concepts and domains _through_ programming, self-directed exploration and learning of a computational medium (JS), Bakhtiarian loops of innovation (when V & F merge)
    purpose: to have the confidence and competence to explore new computational media and to apply them in problems that interest in you in life.  
    meta objective: have an understanding of the computational view of the world that prepares you to explore the interesting philosophical questions.  through remixing, to engage in a collaborative exchange and devellopment of ideas within a larger discourse
    learned through:  snippetry, remixing, snippetry prompts (which can be very esoteric, open-ended, creative, etc. including introducing concepts like quines, wuzzles, cross-medium translations (insomnicat.js), ... alongside the more pragmatic ones such as algorithms, langugae feature drills, etc.  the breadth of snippet prompts is intentional to make learners use programming as a mode of thought rather than just a tool -> programming to leanre)
- layer 4 is philosophy of computation and cognition.  this can be hidden throughout as references, turns of phrase, side/foot notes, etc. for the attuned and intersted reader without distracting from layers 1 and 2
    primary objective: understand the world as information and embodied computation, and use this understanding to generate interesting questions about experience, the nature of the world, etc. 
    purpose: to change the way readers understand themelves, the world, and their relation to the world and others. to engage with the cutting edge of philosophy and science that ask questions about the fundamental nature of our world, our selves, experience, etc.
    meta objective: to prepare learners to engage with cutting edge research, and to equip them with the quine-like skills to produce their own transformative computational learning experiences
    learned through: easter eggs in the main text, side/foot notes, references, questions, ...

maybe we have a title for each layer?

note:  each layer runs through each chapter!  This is not a new chapter sequence proposal.  

PS.  "affordances" is implied throughout this pondering, but not explicitly named or situated yet


=== unanswered round 2


--- Move 1: 

yes, you are right about that new stronger claim about the course's objrctive.  however there are now deeper objecties layered on top of it (see "=== a pondering")

Q1. "active inference" term can be described and used to enrich the definition of twinning, but it will require a little of it's own explanation.

--- Move 2: 

Q2. we're not writing a wannabe GEB, music is an instructive metaphor for understanding our main goals now described under "=== a pondering".  we will use experience-based instructional design as our structural guide for the course (including the spiral curriculum model), not musical forms.  I love and respect GEB but it had a different message for a different audience so it's medium is not ours 

--- move 3: 

Pondering A. yes, we can mention this at some point in the syllabus, but we don't need to labor the point.

--- Move 4: 

no, its' not whole/parts/higher-whole, it's a spiral curriculum.  everything from previous chapters is continuously rehearsed and integrated with the next concentric circle:  see /Users/master/Documents/0-teach-code/0-spiralearn/0-curriculum-committee/0-curricula/spiralearn/welcome-to-programming/narrative/assets/spiral-curriculum.png
    - this also relates to my response for move 2 Q2.

Q3. fine, we can mention this in the deeper section


--- Move 5

yes, you're getting it 

Pondering b. not a bad phrasing idea 

--- move 6: 

Q4. this can stay implied until some foot/side-notes in ch5 Snippetry when learners begin remixing.  but I do like ch1 being the start of dialogue/discourse with others, that is the point of writing code for devs 

--- move 7

Pondering c. yup!  this can go in the deeper section and the appendix

--- move 8

Q5. you understand correctly.  we can both introduce the mu concept and pay tribute to GEB by making an image like this one from GEB (https://blog.p-petrov.com/assets/images/imgs_geb/mu.png) and replacing wholism/reductionism with vibetoading/frogramming

=== mapping AI adoption model levels

you're getting it!  your analysis of these levels wrt the curriculum is correct

Q1. yes, it already does underlie chapter 4.  we can phrase it as "you twin level 2 in order to operate at level 3" (or similar).  this is both fristonion and pedagogically meaningful 
