=== freeform reactions ===

"affordance"!  this term needs to be forefronted.  different NMs afford different computations, different UIs afford different UXs, different modes of thinking (v vs. f) afford different paths to the same end (UX), ...

hm.  true that replacing sofware/hardware with UX is somewhat problematic.  however, we could reframe so UX is the _purpose_ (from PBSI) for both V and F.  this centers a user's experience without replace a designed artifact as the trading zone between Vs and Fs. 

yes, you read my two-scale instrument correclty.

both V and F need to learn to twin the "problematic" emergent NM of LLMs.  we need to address how both the V and F would use an LLM to finally drive home the difference between the two:  the V converses with the LLMs centering a twinned user, the F converses with the LLM centering a twinned NM.  

snippetry is simultaneously exploring the affordances and experience of JS by _perspective stacking_ to write snippets as both a V and F simultaneously towards a purpose of your choosing.  this is a level of mastery that unlocks "programming to learn" for new concepts and domains

=== directed responses ===

--- central pillar move (tl;dr: not moving )

Q1. see above.  the artifact is still the trading zone, the user's experience (not UX in the product sense) is the shared purpose 

Q2. again, back to the previous expanded ATT with an added purpose dimension

Q3. not changing.  UX is purpose 

---- two-scale instrument reading 

yes, you have it.  now with UX as purpose, the second instrument can be metaphored as the audience's experience listening to the mechanical instrument -> the purpose of the concert

both V and F twin the LLM in order to collaborate with it while either twinning the user through design thinking or twinning the notional machine through computational thinking.  so yes, their practices converge in a new way - twinning a conversation partner twinning the target of their thinking.  snippetry in chapter 5 unifies all these to a perspective-stacked singularity

this is a forming thought, we should discuss and refine.

--- ch5 snippetry 

yes, C.  see previous related comment(s)

pondering b.  mu was just to get you thinking, not for inclusion in the course.  

--- anuran 

tadpoles are underdeveloped frogs and toads, common ancestors are fully-formed adults precursors.  

but we leave off this whole thread, we focus on WtF for now

--- curriculum-as-quine

we can mention this as our ethos in the syllabus, and can include some instructions for remixing the whole course in a course appendix.    but we don't need to go heavy on it now 

Q5.  let's table that.  first we get one version out there, see if ti's even popular, then deal with remixes later 

--- data thread reading 

yup!  we can highlight this with examples like (exagerated example) "the program's data enters the user through their eyes from the program via a prompt, is processed and transformed into a response, which enters the program through prompt and a resolve event, ...

I mean in the deeper syllabus section we already discussed in this conversation.  that section can go into the philosophy and levine-y territory, the course itself can stay at the level of my example above 

